# ITE449-phishing
## Spring 2026 Infrastructure Security Group Project

[Wireframe]([https://github.com/carlycopley](https://github.com/carlycopley/ITE449-phishing/blob/main/images/email_domain_analysis_wireframe.png?raw=true))


In the early days of computers, security was an afterthought and a very low-priority concern. People viewed hacking as a harmless prank without any real side effects. However, as the world has become increasingly reliant on technology, the importance of cybersecurity has shifted dramatically. To understand why we need cybersecurity, we need to understand the threat cyberattacks pose to every individual user and online infrastructure as a whole. We cannot talk about cyberattacks without mentioning the most dangerous and widespread threat, phishing attacks.

Phishing attacks originated in the 1990s when people edited their account names to impersonate AOL administrators and “phished” for people’s credentials to continue surfing for free [1]. Another early example of phishing, which is shockingly similar to what we still see today, is the “Love Bug of 2000” [1]. Individuals would receive an email titled “ILOVEYOU” and then were prompted to click on a link to see the letter written from their secret admirer. Opening that file started a chain reaction that caused damage to the user’s machine and spread. It would overwrite image files on the machine, and access the user’s Outlook contacts to then send a copy of itself to then infect their machine. This fairly simple phishing attack affected over 45 million Windows PCs. While the exact tactics of modern phishing attacks have evolved, ever since the early days of phishing attacks, threat actors have been consistent in preying on human psychology and technical mistakes. The threat actor puts you in a position of vulnerability, which could be achieved either by deception or a forced sense of urgency. Instead of following the proper procedure or course of action, you are convinced to break protocol, and have fallen into the trap. 

Phishing attacks are the most common and most successful type of cyberattack. There are many different types of phishing attacks. Pop-up phishing attacks occur when a fake security pop-up appears on a victim’s computer to trick them into clicking it. Often, the victim will be directed to download a file which is malware. Spear phishing targets an individual in an organization to try to steal their login credentials. Usually the attacker will gather personal information such as name, position, and contact details before they attack. The most common type of phishing attack is email phishing. This occurs when an attacker sends an email that looks legitimate, tricking the victim into entering sensitive information as a reply or into a site. Now that the hacker has gained this information, they can exploit it by selling it online or stealing from the victim. When an attacker uses a fraudulent website, this is called HTTPS phishing [2]. 
During “2022 alone, the FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) reported over 300,000 victims affected by phishing attacks in the United States” [3]. From these phishing attacks, attackers were able to take over $52 million in total from their victims. During that year, phishing attacks were the most commonly employed technique by cyber criminals. The Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) reported in 2020 that cyber attackers statistically preferred to register new domain names rather than to compromise a pre-existing name [3]. It was discovered that “a striking 65% of maliciously registered domain names are deployed for phishing purposes within a mere five days after their registration,” and individual “domain name[s] can [also] be associated with tens of thousands of malicious URLs” [3]. In 2021, Google registered more than 2,145,013 phishing sites, a 27% increase from 2020 [4]. 

Inside the realm of phishing attacks, we will be honing in on a specific application of this attack, DNS-based phishing attacks. A DNS-based phishing attack is an attack where a threat actor impersonates a trustworthy site and then funnels users to a nefarious site where they attempt to take advantage of you. They have multiple goals behind getting you to the fraudulent website. The most common goal is to gather personal information such as usernames and passwords. This attack does not seem inherently malicious when the website you think you are on is a social media or bank site, which emphasizes the dangers of phishing. Another goal of DNS-based phishing attacks is to collect your financial information. Sadly, people fall for this every day when they enter their card information on a fraudulent website. Another goal for this attack is to deploy malware onto your device. This can be done by a prompt of an “urgent security update” or other seemingly important process you “must” complete [5]. The last goal of DNS-based phishing attacks is to enable a larger attack in the future. Once these attackers have your information, they can use that to look for higher-value accounts that you might have and give themselves more access to cause harm to you and your system. This may also allow them to deploy ransomware by encrypting the new information the attacker just gathered until you pay them a fee, or they may sell the information to other attackers. A phishing domain is not the ultimate objective; rather, it serves as an entry point that enables broader, financially and strategically motivated attacks. 

The simplest and most effective way to combat a phishing attack is to analyze the domain name information and correctly identify if it is malicious before any user interaction can occur. This is because domain name registration is the first phase of a phishing attack’s lifecycle [3]. Small differences can be easy to catch if users pay close attention. For example, recognizing the faulty domain name "paypa1.com " instead of "paypal.com" can prevent a user from submitting information that accesses their finances. 
	
While the security situation has improved from the early days of phishing mentioned before, significant challenges remain. Unfortunately, it is not a top priority for users to ensure their online security. Many users, especially older generations who did not grow up with technology, are not aware of the wide variety of cyber attacks that exist. Users are more inclined to invest in cybersecurity software and protection services such as Bitdefender or Norton 360 which provide protection from viruses and internet security [6]. The use of password managers has also become a popular cybersecurity method [7]. As a solution to combat phishing attacks, this paper presents a web application created so that users can safely identify if a domain name is safe to interact with. This tool will be accessible and effective for all users, regardless of their cybersecurity background.
